
1. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2007 Jan-Feb;30(1):3-12.

Effects of donepezil adjunctive treatment to ziprasidone on cognitive deficits in
schizophrenia: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study.

Fagerlund B(1), Søholm B, Fink-Jensen A, Lublin H, Glenthøj BY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry E, Center for Neuropsychiatric Schizophrenia Research,
Bispebjerg University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. bfagerlund@email.com

The objective of this study was to examine the effects of adjunctive treatment
with the acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, donepezil, on cognitive deficits and
psychopathology in schizophrenic patients treated with the antipsychotic,
ziprasidone. The design of the study was double blind, placebo controlled, and
longitudinal. Patients were treated with ziprasidone for 8 weeks, thereafter
randomized to 4 months of double-blind adjunctive treatment with either donepezil
(dose, 5-10 mg) or placebo. The severity of psychopathology (PANSS) and the
cognitive deficits were examined at baseline and after 4 months. A total of 21
schizophrenic patients were enrolled, of whom 11 patients completed the trial
(donepezil, n = 7; placebo, n = 4). There were no within- or between-group
differences in changes on the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale scores or a
global cognitive score. Within-group improvements (all at trend level P = 0.07)
were seen in the placebo group on Trail-Making Test B, immediate verbal recall,
and set-shifting errors. The donepezil group showed a significant deterioration
on planning efficiency (P = 0.04). Between-group differences were found between
the lack of improvement in immediate verbal recall in the donepezil group and the
improvement in the placebo group (P = 0.02), and between the deterioration of
planning efficiency in the donepezil group and the stability in the placebo group
(trend level, P = 0.07). Linear regression analyses showed that neither baseline 
psychopathology scores, baseline levels of cognitive deficits, nor
psychopathology changes over time accounted for these changes in cognitive
scores. The study found no evidence of improved cognition after treatment with
donepezil, although the conclusions that can be drawn are limited by the small
sample size.

PMID: 17272964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

