
1. Int Psychogeriatr. 2006 Sep;18(3):429-36. Epub 2006 Feb 15.

Donepezil for negative signs in elderly patients with schizophrenia: an add-on,
double-blind, crossover, placebo-controlled study.

Mazeh D(1), Zemishlani H, Barak Y, Mirecki I, Paleacu D.

Author information: 
(1)Psychogeriatric ward, Abarbanel Mental Health Center, Bat-Yam and the Sackler
School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Israel. mazehdor@netvision.net.il

OBJECTIVE: Cognitive impairment and negative signs are common in patients with
schizophrenia. Up to 35% of elderly patients with schizophrenia fulfill the
diagnostic criteria of dementia. Donepezil inhibits cholinesterase, thus
enhancing cholinergic neurotransmission. We tested the efficacy of donepezil in
elderly patients with chronic schizophrenia and severe cognitive impairment.
METHOD: Following baseline assessment, patients were randomly assigned to receive
either donepezil or placebo. The dose was 5 mg daily for the first week and 10 mg
for an additional 11 weeks. The procedure was repeated using the crossover
compound. The Positive and Negative Symptom Scale (PANSS), Clinical Global
Impression Scale (CGI) and Alzheimer Disease Assessment Scale - Cognitive
subscale (ADAS-Cog) were used to assess the severity of symptoms, cognitive
status and intervention effects.
RESULTS: Twenty subjects were enrolled (15 females, five males), mean age 70.2
years (SD 6.5) and mean duration of disease 38.5 years (SD 9.3). A modest
treatment effect was found for both placebo and donepezil treatment periods. No
crossover effect was found. No statistical differences were demonstrated between 
the two treatment groups (CGI p = 0.37, PANSS p = 0.71, ADAS-Cog p = 0.86). Two
patients died during the study period due to unrelated causes and one patient
discontinued participation due to increased agitation.
CONCLUSION: Donepezil does not seem to improve negative signs and cognitive
impairment in elderly patients with chronic schizophrenia.

PMID: 16478570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

